Pathol. Oncol. Res. (2019) 25:461–469
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12253-017-0335-y

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Unsupervised Clustering of Immunohistochemical Markers
to Define High-Risk Endometrial Cancer

Enora Laas 1,2 & Marcos Ballester 1,2,3 & Annie Cortez 2,4 & Olivier Graesslin 5 &
Emile Daraï 1,2,3

Received: 26 October 2016 / Accepted: 19 October 2017 / Published online: 20 December 2017
# Arányi Lajos Foundation 2017

Abstract Considerable heterogeneity exists in outcomes of ear-
ly endometrial cancer (EC) according to the type but also the
histological grading. Our goal was to describe the immunohisto-
chemical profiles of type I EC according to grades and type II
EC, to identify groups of interacting proteins using principal
component analysis (PCA) and unsupervised clustering. We
studied 13 immunohistochemical markers (steroid receptors,
pro/anti-apoptotic proteins, metalloproteinases (MMP) and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP), and CD44 isoforms
known for their role in endometrial pathology. Co-expressed
proteins associated with the type, grade and outcome of EC were
determined by PCA and unsupervised clustering. PCA identified
three functional groups of proteins from 43 tissue samples (38
type I and 5 type II EC): the first was characterized by p53
expression; the second by MMPs, bcl-2, PR B and CD44v6;
and the third by ER alpha, PR A, TIMP-2 and CD44v3.
Unsupervised clustering found two main clusters of proteins,
with both type I grade 3 and type II EC exhibiting the same
cluster profile. PCA and unsupervised clustering of immunohis-
tochemical markers in EC contribute to a better comprehension
and classification of the disease.

* Enora Laas

enora.laas@curie.fr

1

2

Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Hôpital Tenon, AP-HP, 4 rue de
la Chine, 75020 Paris, France

Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, Paris 6, France

3 UMRS-938, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, France
4

Service d’Anatomie Pathologie, Hôpital Tenon, AP-HP, 4 rue de la
Chine, 75020 Paris, France

5

Service de gynécologie-obstétrique, Hôpital Alix de Champagne,
CHU de Reims, 45 rue Cognacq-Jay, 51100 Reims, France

Keywords Endometrial cancer . High-risk endometrial
cancer . Immunohistochemistry . Unsupervised clustering .
Principal component analysis

Background

Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common malignant tumour
of the female genital tract and mainly affects postmenopausal
women. Based on clinico-pathological, immunohistochemical,
and molecular genetic properties, EC tumours have been classi-
fied into two types. Type I, corresponding to endometrioid car-
cinoma, accounts for 85% of EC and is mainly of low or inter-
mediate grade, estrogen-related and is preceded or coexists with
atypical and complex endometrial hyperplasia. Type II, corre-
sponding to serous, clear cell or carcinosarcoma, accounts for
approximately 15% of EC, and exhibits an aggressive behaviour
which is unrelated to oestrogen stimulation, associated with P53
mutations and occasionally arises from endometrial polyps or
precancerous lesions in atrophic endometria [1, 2].Type I EC
has a good prognosis with an overall 5-year survival over 85%
while type II EC has a poor prognosis with an overall 5-year
survival of 35% as well as being responsible for about 50% of
EC recurrences [3, 4].

In addition to EC type, histological grading is a major
prognostic factor and a determinant for adjuvant therapy. For
type I EC, grade 1 (G1) and 2 (G2) are associated with good
prognosis when restricted to the uterus. Type I Grade 3 (G3)
EC is an aggressive tumour conveying a higher risk of lymph
node metastasis. Type II ECs are high-grade tumours by def-
inition and carry a higher mortality than type I [3, 4].

In addition to the International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics (FIGO) classification, the European Society of
Medical Oncology (ESMO) recurrence risk classification de-
fines patients as being at low (type I, G1 or G2 EC with less

462

E. Laas et al.

than 50% of myometrial invasion), intermediate (type I G3 EC
with less than 50% of myometrial invasion and type I G1 or 2
EC with more than 50% of myometrial invasion), and high-
risk (type I G3 EC with more than 50% of myometrial inva-
sion and type II EC). To improve patient risk stratification, the
presence of lymphovascular space involvement (LVSI) [5] has
been incorporated into international classifications such as in
France (INCa recommendations). Despite these modifica-
tions, a considerable heterogeneity in outcomes of early EC,
especially for the intermediate risk group, has been observed
[6, 7]. Moreover, controversies exist on whether type I G3 EC
should be assimilated to type II EC [8, 9]. Voss et al. demon-
strated that type I G3 EC and type II EC had similar clinical,
immunohistochemical profiles and survival outcomes [8]
while Zannoni et al. reported different immunohistological
profiles for p53, oestrogen and progesterone receptors be-
tween these two entities [10].

To better define risk groups of recurrence with a view to
adapting the therapeutic strategy, there is a need for new tools.
Principal component analysis (PCA) and unsupervised clus-
tering are machine learning methods which analyse explana-
tory data in an attempt to identify hidden structures in unla-
beled data. These methods are widely used in genomics to
reduce the dimensionality of high dimensional genomic data.
We decided to study a panel of previously assessed EC
immunohistochemical markers by PCA and unsupervised
clustering to describe the immunohistochemical profiles of
type I EC according to grade and type II EC and thereby to
identify groups of interacting proteins involved in the physio-
pathology of the disease.

Material and Methods

Patients

We obtained tissue samples from 43 women who underwent
total hysterectomy from 1999 to 2004 in the Gynecology
Departments of Tenon Hospital, Paris, France and at the
Institut Mère-Enfant Alix de Champagne, Reims, France.
These tissue samples included 43 EC: 38 type I EC and 5 type
II EC. Two pathologists reviewed all the tissue samples to
confirm the diagnosis. None of the women with EC had re-
ceived chemotherapy or radiotherapy before surgery. Patients
previously treated with tamoxifen were excluded from the
study. The histological grade of EC was assessed according
to the WHO classification. All the samples were obtained with
full and informed patient consent. Only patients with strict
follow-up in the two institutions were included. The patients
gave their consent and the research protocol was approved by
the Consultative Committee for Protection of Persons in
Biomedical Research of Paris 6 (France).

Immunohistochemistry

We used a selection of the 13 most studied biological markers
which are known to play a role in EC. Tissues were immedi-
ately fixed in formalin (10%) and then processed as paraffin
blocks. Four-micron-thick sections of formalin-fixed tissues
were deparaffinised in a xylene substitute (EZ Prepw 1× ref.
950,102) and rehydrated through a graded series of ethanol
solutions. The sections were immunostained using the
Ventana Benchmark XTw automated immunohistochemistry
system (Ultra-ViewTM, Universal DAB-Ventanaw).
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on hot spots
on ten fields at ×40 magnification.

Oestrogen Receptor (ER), Progesteron Receptor (PR), Ki67,
Bcl-2 and p53 Immunostaining

Rabbit monoclonal antibodies directed against ER (prediluted,
SP1, Ventana Medical Systems, USA), PR (prediluted, 1E2,
Ventana Medical Systems, USA), mouse monoclonal anti-
body against ki67 (1/150, Mib 1, DAKO) and p53 (1/75,
DO7, DAKO), and an anti-human-bcl-2 rabbit polyclonal an-
tibody (1/50, Santa-Cruz Biotechnology, Santa-Cruz, CA,
USA) were used. An antigen retrieval procedure was per-
formed (Dako Target Retrieval Solution; 98 °C, 20 min) prior
to ER, PR, ki67, p53 and bcl-2 staining. This automated pro-
cedure is based on an indirect biotin-avidin system. A univer-
sal biotinylated immunoglobulin was used as a secondary an-
tibody, diaminobenzidine as the substrate and hematoxylin as
the counterstain. Positive controls were sections of human
breast tissue for ER and PR, colon adenocarcinoma for ki67,
serous ovarian carcinoma for p53 and lymph node for bcl-2
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For negative
controls, the primary antibody was replaced by an irrelevant
antibody of the same IgG subtype.

Metalloproteinases MMP-2, −7 and− 9 and Tissue Inhibitor
of Metalloproteinase TIMP-1 and -2 Immunostaining

Purified mouse monoclonal antibodies against human MMP-2
(1/10, gelatinase-A, Ab-2, clone 17B11, Novocastra
Laboratories Ltd., Newcastle, United Kingdom), human
MMP-7 (1/50, matrilysin, Ab-3, clone ID2, Calbiochem,
Oncogene Research Products, Cambridge, United
Kingdom), human MMP-9 (1/10, gelatinase-B, Ab-3, clone
56 2A4, Calbiochem, Oncogene Research Products), human
TIMP-1 (1/50 Ab-4, clone 3A4, Novocastra Laboratories Ltd)
and human TIMP-2 (Ab-2, clone 6F6a, Novocastra
Laboratories Ltd) were used as primary antibodies.

Prior to MMP-2, MMP-9, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 staining,
an antigen retrieval step was performed combined with a high-
temperature antigen-unmasking technique (DAKO® Target
Retrieval Solution; 100 °C, 30 min). For MMP-7, antigen

Unsupervised Clustering of Immunohistochemical Markers to Define High-Risk Endometrial Cancer

463

unmasking was achieved with proteinase K. The automated
procedure is based on an indirect biotin-avidin system with a
universal biotinylated immunoglobulin as secondary anti-
body, diaminobenzidine as substrate, and hematoxylin as
counterstain. For MMP-7 and MMP-9, a Ventana amplifica-
tion kit was used (Ventana Medical Systems®) in addition to
the automated procedure. Positive controls for MMP-2, −7,
−9, TIMP-1, −2 were sections of bronchial tissue, ovarian
cancer, breast cancer and placenta, respectively. For negative
controls, the primary antibody was replaced by an irrelevant
non-immune mouse antibody of the same IgG subtype (Dako
Laboratories, Glostrup, Denmark).

CD44 Isoforms and Variants v3 and v6 Immunostaining

The following monoclonal antibodies (R&D Systems,
Abingdon, UK) were used: 2C5, binding to CD44s and all
the variants encoded by exons 3 to 10, 3G5, specific for
CD44v3 and 2F10, specific for CD44v6.

For the antigen unmasking procedure, first the sections
were incubated in citrate buffer 10-mM pH 6 in a microwave
oven for periods of 5 min each at 500 watts. After washing,
sections were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with the
primary antibody in a 1/100 dilution. The revelation was per-
formed by using the avidin-biotin technique (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, UK). Peroxidase activity was de-
tected according to the method of Graham and Karnovsky.
Positive controls were uterine myomas as previously pub-
lished by our team [11] Negative controls were obtained by
substituting the primary antibody by either PBS or isotopic
immunoglobins.

Analysis of Immunohistochemical Results

For semi-quantitative analysis of ER, PR, Ki67, p53, bcl-2
and CD44 isoforms, the percentage of stained cells was cal-
culated by two independent observers. For MMPs and TIMPs,
the intensity of staining was analysed using HSCORE:
ΣPi*(i + 1), where i is the intensity of the staining varying
from 1 to 3 and Pi is the percentage of stained cells.

Statistical Analysis

Quantitative expression of protein is expressed as mean values
with standard deviation. Mean values in both groups were
compared using t-test for normal distribution or non-
parametric Wilcoxon test, as appropriate.

To take into account the complexity of biological networks of
a large number of proteins, we used a statistical method of unsu-
pervised clustering as has already been used in genomic research.
PCA is a classic technique used to reduce the dimensionality of a
dataset by transforming to a new set of variables (the principal
components (PCs)), to summarize the features of the data. PCs

are uncorrelated and the kth PC has the kth largest variance
among all the PCs. The first PC can be interpreted as the direction
that maximizes the variation of the projection of the data points.
The second PC must be orthogonal to the first PC, ... The tradi-
tional approach is to use the first few PCs in the data analysis
since they capture most of the variation in the original dataset.

Quantitative data of protein immunostaining can then be
summarized in coherent patterns, related to their correlation
with the PCs. Such dimensionality reduction can be a very
useful step for visualizing and processing high-dimensional
datasets, while retaining as much of the variance in the dataset
as possible. EC type was used as a supplementary variable to
help interpret the dimensions of variability. For the PCA, the
expression values of each protein were standardized to zero
mean and unit variance. Types of EC were then colorized on
the dimensional space (the factorial map) and confidence el-
lipses were constructed.

In a second step, we grouped the different EC types into
clusters, using the k-means method. This constitutes one of the
simplest unsupervised learning algorithms that regroup data
points into disjoint groups such that data points belonging to
same cluster are similar while data points belonging to different
clusters are dissimilar. The procedure is a simple way of classi-
fying a given data set through k clusters, fixed a priori. The main
idea is to define k centroids, one for each cluster. In the first step, k
initial Bmeans^ (centroid) are randomly generated within the data
domain. The best choice is to place them as far away from each
other as possible. In the next step, k clusters are created by asso-
ciating each observation with the nearest centroid. Once no point
is outstanding, an early groupage is done. At this point, k new
centroids are recalculated as barycenters of the clusters resulting
from the previous step and the centroid of each of the k clusters
becomes the new centroid. After forming these k new centroids,
steps 2 and 3 are repeated until convergence has been reached.

To know the optimal number of clusters (k), we plotted the
inter-cluster distance function of the number of clusters. We
chose the k which corresponded to the inflexion of the curve.
Once the high dimensional data were transformed into low-
er dimensional data via the PCA, we used the factorial map to
project k-means clusters into this lower dimensional subspace.
We could then confront the clusters to the real type of EC.
Data were managed with an Excel database (Microsoft,
Redmond, WA) and analysed using R 2.15.2 software with
the FactoMineR package, available online.

Results

Immunohistochemical Results According to Histological
Type and Grade of EC

Among the 43 specimens, 38 were type I EC (17 of G1, 13 of G2
and 8 of G3) and 5 were type II EC.

464

Table 1 Proteins
immunostaining in endometrial
cancer according the histological
types and grades

G1-Type I EC
(n = 17)

G2-Type I EC
(n = 13)

G3-Type I EC
(n = 8)

p53

bcl-2

ER alpha

PR A

PR B

MMP-2

TIMP-1

MMP-7

MMP-9

TIMP-2

CD44s

CD44v3

CD44v6

5.4 (9.4)

22.5 (27.7)

45.1 (24.9)

23.9 (16.3)

16.3 (19)

61.9 (61.9)

130.5 (72.7)

157.9 (97.7)

208.6 (54.5)

87.3 (55.4)

44.7 (29.6)

64.8 (49.1)

70 (34.8)

0.8 (1.25)

16.7 (31.5)

9.1 (12.6)

16.1 (23.6)

16.6 (21)

107.3 (65.2)

120.9 (74.8)

166.9 (61.8)

208 (74.7)

61.1 (43.8)

59.9 (35.6)

78.8 (29.9)

84.6 (27.9)

15.7 (17.5)

28 (36.9)

4.2 (4.7)

1.8 (2.59)

7.8 (17.2)

96.9 (77.7)

79.9 (43.6)

131.2 (67.9)

231.2 (50.8)

14.4 (17.6)

49.1 (34)

82.5 (31.1)

72.9 (36.7)

E. Laas et al.

p-value

<0.001

0.4

<0.001

0.008

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.7

0.09

<0.001

0.6

0.6

0.6

Type II
EC (n = 5)

25.2 (17.3)

0.4 (0.894)

1.1 (1.14)

0.06 (0.09)

0.3 (0.6)

80 (47.3)

90 (62)

137 (50.4)

282 (26.8)

10 (7.9)

41.4 (35)

60 (35.9)

65 (23.8)

G = Grade; EC = Endometrial cancer; PR Progesteron Receptor; ER Estrogen receptor; MMP Metalloproteinase;
TIMP: tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase

Table 1 and Fig. 1 show the distribution of immunohisto-
chemical protein expressions in type I G1, 2 or 3 and type II
EC using univariate analysis. A difference in p53 (p < 0.001), ER
alpha (p < 0.001), PRA (p = 0.008) and TIMP-2 (p < 0.001)
expressions was noted between the groups. No differences in bcl-
2, PRB, MMP-2, TIMP-1, MMP-2, MMP-7, CD44s, CD44v3,
CD44v6 were observed between the groups while a trend for a
difference was noted for MMP-9.

Results of Principal Component Analysis

The first two dimensions of the PCA are shown in Fig. 2. These
two dimensions represented 43% of the total variance of the
proteins (28.2% for dimension 1 and 14.6% for dimension 2).
With three axes, more than half (54.1%) of the variance was
reached. Table 2 summarizes the proteins with a significant con-
tribution to each of the three axes.

Dimension 1 of the PCA separated proteins into pro-apoptotic
(p53) and ‘others’. Dimension 2 separated proteins into 2 groups:
one comprising CD44v3, ER alpha, TIMP-2 and PR A and the
other p53, CD44s and v6, MMP-2, −7 and −9, TIMP-1, bcl-2
and PR B. Schematically, this PCA identified three functional
groups of proteins: the first characterized by p53 expression; the
second by MMPs, bcl-2, PR B and CD44v6; and the third by ER
alpha, PR A, TIMP-2 and CD44v3.

The K-means clustering analysis was performed on the 38
patients with no missing data on proteins. The K-means clus-
tering found two main clusters of proteins. The characteristics
of these clusters are summarized in Table 3. Distribution of
histological types was significantly different: within cluster 1
there was 21.7% of type I G3 EC and 17.4% of type II EC; and
in cluster 2 only 7.1% of type I G3 EC and no type II EC
(p = 0.02). LVSI was significantly higher in cluster 1 (63.6%

in cluster 1 vs. 14.3% in cluster 2, p = 0.004). Recurrence rate
and lymph node involvement were higher in cluster 1 without
reaching statistical significance.

The two clusters are represented on the factor map (dimen-
sion 1 and 2) (Fig. 3). Cluster 1 is on the left of axis 2 (corre-
sponding to the pro-apoptotic p53 protein in the PCA), and
cluster 2 on the right side of this axis.

When the types and grades of EC were also represented on
the factor map, an overlap in the confidence ellipses was ob-
served among type I EC between G1 and 2. Among type 1 G2
EC, a heterogeneity was observed with some tumours corre-
sponding more to cluster 1 profile and others exhibiting clus-
ter 2 profile. Finally, both type 1 G3 EC and type II EC ex-
hibited cluster 1 profile.

Discussion

Using unsupervised clustering, the present study distinguishes
two clusters of protein expression in EC. A panel of ten pro-
teins were found to discriminate these two clusters by PCA.
The first cluster corresponds to type I G3 and type II EC and
the second to type I G1 and 2 EC.

From a pathological point of view, our results suggest
that a continuum exists from type I G1 to type II EC in-
volving additional protein alterations. Among the various

Fig. 1 Distribution of protein expressions according to endometrial
cancer type and grade a:Pro/antiapoptotic proteins and steroid
receptors. G: grade, EC endometrial cancer; ER Estrogen receptor;
PR progesterone receptor. b: Metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors
of metalloproteinases. G: grade, EC:endometrial cancer, MMP:
Metalloproteinase; TIMP: tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase. c:
CD44s, CD44v3 and v6. G: grade, EC endometrial cancer



Unsupervised Clustering of Immunohistochemical Markers to Define High-Risk Endometrial Cancer

465

466

E. Laas et al.

Szcumicz et al. reported that the ER+/PR+/HER2- subtype
was associated with the most favourable prognosis [20]
whereas a loss of PR expression may lead to the develop-
ment of a more invasive phenotype [21]. Saegusa and
Okayasu reported that ER alpha shows a stepwise decrease
from normal endometrium or low-grade EC to high-grade
EC [22] while decreased expression in ER and PR was
observed in tumours of poor prognosis such as advanced
stages [23], G3 EC [24], clear cell carcinoma [25] and
carcinosarcomas [26] as well as serous carcinoma that are
mainly ER/PR negative [27]. Finally, in accordance with
previous studies [24, 28], Voss et al., reported no significant
difference in overall rates of expression of ER/PR between
G3 EC and type II [8].

In the current study, p53 expression was a key factor to
distinguish various biological profiles of EC. We also found
that bcl-2 strongly contributed to the dimension of the PCA.
Our results are in agreement with previous studies showing
that point mutations in p53 are found in 90% of type 2 EC but
in only 10–20% of G3 type I EC [4, 29, 30]. The human TP53
gene encodes a nuclear protein that induces growth arrest or
apoptosis in response to endogenous and exogenous stress.
The functional inactivation of the p53 protein plays a crucial
role in the malignant transformation process by increasing the
capacity for tumour cell division and proliferation, and is con-
sequently associated with poor survival [19, 31, 32]. The bcl-2
gene codes for a protein which inhibits apoptotic cell death
and is involved in the normal cell death program [33]. An
imbalance in the bcl-2/bax ratio is known to convey apoptosis
resistance in cancer cells [34]. However, important controver-
sies exist on bcl-2 expression in EC [35, 36]. Bcl-2 persistence
is frequently associated with EC, and failure to inactivate its
expression is probably related to the development of EC [37].
BAG-1, bcl-2 and steroid receptor binding protein was shown
to stain more frequently in high-grade cancers indicating an
association between expression of BAG-1 and prognosis [38].
Moreover, our results are in accordance with those of the
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) highlighting the heterogeneity

Fig. 2 Principal component analysis: variable factor map. Dim:
dimension; ER: Estrogen receptor; PR: progesterone receptor; MMP:
Metalloproteinase; TIMP: tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase

immunohistochemical markers, PCA analysis found that the
co-expression of steroid receptors (PR A et B, ER alpha),
TIMP-1 and -2, MMP-7, CD44v6, bcl-2 and p53 were the
most predictive, confirming their crucial role in endometrial
carcinogenesis. These results are in agreement with those of
previous studies focusing on the transition between simple
hyperplasia and atypical endometrial hyperplasia [12] on
one hand and between atypical endometrial hyperplasia
and type I G1 EC on the other, with similar proteins in-
volved in the processes [13]. Several retrospective studies
have shown that ER and PR status in EC are independent
prognostic markers [14–16]. Both PR A and PR B have
been shown to modulate ER alpha and oestrogen-
dependent gene expression [17]. High levels of expression
are common in well-differentiated endometrioid EC and
their presence is associated with a survival benefit com-
pared with ER/PR negative tumours [18, 19]. Lapi Nska-

Table 2 Contribution of proteins
to the three first principal
components

Dimension 1

Dimension 2

Dimension 3

PR A
PR B
TIMP-2
ER alpha
TIMP-1
bcl-2
CD44v6
MMP-7

p53

0.86
0.84
0.68
0.62
0.60
0.52
0.44
0.33

-0,5

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.01
0.04

0.01

MMP-2
bcl-2
CD44s
MMP-9
CD44v3
ER alpha

0.83
0.52
0.52
0.40
-0,33
-0,39

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.01
0.04
0.01

p53
MMP-9
CD44v6
CD44s
MMP-7

0.6
0.55
0.55
-0,35
-0,39

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.03
0.01

PR Progesteron Receptor; ER Estrogen receptor; MMP Metalloproteinase; TIMP: tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase

Unsupervised Clustering of Immunohistochemical Markers to Define High-Risk Endometrial Cancer

467

Table 3 Characteristics of the
clusters defined by the K-means
method*

Cluster 1 (n = 23)

Cluster 2 (n = 14)

p-value

Histology

Stage

Myometrial infiltration

LVSI

Lymph node involvement

Recurrence

G1-type I EC
G2-type I EC

G3-type I EC

Type II EC

IA
IB

II

III

IV

None
<50%
≥50%

5 (21.7)
9 (39.1)

5 (21.7)

4 (17.4)

7 (30.4)
6 (26.1)

3 (13)

6 (26.1)

1 (4.3)

5 (21.7)
6 (26.1)

12 (52.2)

14 (63.6)

7 (46.7)

3 (13)

10 (71.4)
3 (21.4)

1 (7.1)

0 (0)

6(42.9)
2 (14.3)

3 (21.4)

3 (21.4)

0 (0)

1 (7.1)
7 (50)

6 (42.9)

2 (14.3)

1 (9.1)

0 (0)

0.02

0.9

0.3

0.004

0.1

0.3

*Patients with no missing data for protein (n = 38). G = Grade; EC = Endometrial cancer, LVSI = Lymphovascular
space involvement

of EC by identifying 4 distinct genomic classes: 1) POLE
ultra-mutated, 2) MSI hypermutated, 3) copy-number low mi-
crosatellite stable (MSS), and 4) copy-number high serous-
like [39] displaying increasing TP53 and somatic copy-
number alterations. The POLE ultra-mutated defined a subset
of patients characterized by mutations in the exonuclease do-
main of the polymerase epsilon (POLE) gene, a high mutation
load and an excellent prognosis [40]. Sixty percent of POLE
ultra-mutated EC corresponded to high grade endometrioid
EC with 35% exhibiting TP53 mutations.

Fig. 3 Principal component analysis: individual factor map with the
clusters (defined by the K-means method) and the confidence ellipses
according to types and grades of EC. Dim: dimension; G: grade; EC:
endometrial cancer

In addition to steroid receptors and pro- and anti-apoptotic
proteins, PCA analysis underlines that TIMP-1 and -2 and
MMP-7 expression play a crucial role in EC physiopathology.
Low TIMP-2 expression has been linked to invasiveness in
various malignancies [41]. Graesslin et al. showed that TIMP-
2 expression was lower in type 2 EC (serous and clear cell)
than in type 1 EC, and that low TIMP-2 expression was cor-
related with aggressiveness of the tumour [42]. A relation was
also found between TIMP-2 downregulation in G3 EC com-
pared to G1 and 2 but without difference between these two
latter grades. These results are in agreement with those using
microarray gene expression demonstrating that TIMP-2
isdownregulated in high grade tumours [43]. Moreover,
Graesslin et al., reported a relation between low TIMP-2 ex-
pression and myometrial invasion, LVSI and lymph node me-
tastasis, whereas Moser et al.. found no relation between
TIMP-2 expression and histological prognostic factors or
overall survival [44]. Few data are available on the possible
role of MMP-7 in EC. A previous study showed a relation
between high MMP-7 expression and lymph node metastasis.
Wang et al. demonstrated that MMP-7 activates progelatinases
(proMMP-2 and proMMP-9) and thus facilitates tumour inva-
sion and metastasis [45]. These results are consistent with our
study showing that TIMP-1 and 2, as well as MMP-7, were
selected as essential variables in the progression from type I
G1 EC to type II EC.

There are limited and controversial reports on CD44 ex-
pression in EC [46, 47]. Our PCA analysis supports the con-
tribution of CD44 in EC. Ayhan et al. [48] and Hoshimoto
et al. [49] reported a relation between CD44v6 expression and
poor prognosis while Gun et al. found no relation [50]
underlining the need for further investigations.

468

E. Laas et al.

Some limits of the present study have to be underlined.
First, despite the use of the most relevant biological markers,
we did not evaluate PTEN and E-cadherin, that have been
recently suggested to be involved in the carcinogenesis of
EC [30]. Type I ECs have been shown to display mutations
in PTEN, PIK3CA, KRAS, and β-catenin, and microsatellite
instability; while type II demonstrate genetic alterations in
p53, HER-2/neu, p16, and E-cadherin [3].

Second, the low number of patients with type 2 EC could
be a source of bias. However, it is important to underline that
type 2 EC represent only about 20% of all EC. Third, even
though PCA is a valuable tool to reduce dimensionality of
protein expression data sets for visualization, caution should
be exercised when interpreting cluster structures observed in
the reduced dimensional subspace of the PCs. Yeung et al.
showed that clustering with the PCs enhances cluster quality
only when the right number of components or when the right
set of PCs is chosen, and that using different data analysis
techniques and different clustering algorithms to analyse the
same data set can lead to very different conclusions [51].
Finally, several scoring systems (H-Score, Allred scoring sys-
tem, ASCO/CAP criterion) have been advocated to evaluate
the ER and PR positivity in endometrial cancer. To avoid bias
with others markers evaluated in the current study, we chose a
classic evaluation of ER and PR on hot spots without using
Allred scoring system that has been demonstrated to be more
sensitive and specific in breast cancer [52, 53].

In conclusion, using an unsupervised clustering method,
our results indicate that there are sequential alterations in pro-
tein expression in EC contributing to a better understanding of
the physiopathology of EC.

Compliance with Ethical Standards

Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

Ethical Approval All procedures performed in studies involving hu-
man participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the
institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964
Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical stan-
dards. For this type of study formal consent is not required.

References

1. Prat J (2004) Prognostic parameters of endometrial carcinoma.

Hum Pathol 35:649–662

2. Pansare V, Munkarah AR, Schimp V et al (2007) Increased expres-
sion of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha in type I and type II endo-
metrial carcinomas. Mod Pathol 20:35–43. https://doi.org/10.1038/
modpathol.3800718

3. Llobet D, Pallares J, Yeramian A et al (2009) Molecular pathology
of endometrial carcinoma: practical aspects from the diagnostic and
therapeutic viewpoints. J Clin Pathol 62:777–785. https://doi.org/
10.1136/jcp.2008.056101

4. Lax SF (2004) Molecular genetic pathways in various types of
endometrial carcinoma: from a phenotypical to a molecular-based
classification. Virchows Arch 444:213–223. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00428-003-0947-3

5. Colombo N, Preti E, Landoni F et al (2011) Endometrial cancer:
ESMO clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and fol-
low-up. Ann Oncol 22(Suppl 6):vi35–vi39. https://doi.org/10.
1093/annonc/mdr374

6. Ballester M, Dubernard G, Lécuru F et al (2011) Detection rate and
diagnostic accuracy of sentinel-node biopsy in early stage endome-
trial cancer: a prospective multicentre study (SENTI-ENDO).
Lancet Oncol 12:469–476. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-
2045(11)70070-5

7. Nugent EK, Bishop EA, Mathews CA et al (2012) Do uterine risk
factors or lymph node metastasis more significantly affect recur-
rence in patients with endometrioid adenocarcinoma? Gynecol
Oncol 125:94–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.11.049
8. Voss MA, Ganesan R, Ludeman L et al (2012) Should grade 3
endometrioid endometrial carcinoma be considered a type 2
cancer-a clinical and pathological evaluation. Gynecol Oncol 124:
15–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.07.030

9. Alvarez T, Miller E, Duska L, Oliva E (2012) Molecular profile of
grade 3 endometrioid endometrial carcinoma: is it a type I or type II
endometrial carcinoma? Am J Surg Pathol 36:753–761. https://doi.
org/10.1097/PAS.0b013e318247b7bb

10. Zannoni GF, Vellone VG, Arena V et al (2010) Does high-grade
endometrioid carcinoma (grade 3 FIGO) belong to type I or type II
endometrial cancer? A clinical–pathological and immunohisto-
chemical study. Virchows Arch 457:27–34. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00428-010-0939-z

11. Poncelet C, Walker F, Madelenat P et al (2001) Expression of CD44
standard and isoforms V3 and V6 in uterine smooth muscle tumors:
a possible diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma.
Hum Pathol 32:1190–1196

12. Laas E, Ballester M, Cortez A et al (2014) Supervised clustering of
immunohistochemical markers to distinguish atypical and non-
atypical endometrial hyperplasia. Gynecol Endocrinol:1–4. https://
doi.org/10.3109/09513590.2014.989981

13. Laas E, Ballester M, Cortez A et al (2014) Supervised clustering of
immunohistochemical markers to distinguish atypical endometrial
hyperplasia from grade 1 endometrial cancer. Gynecol Oncol.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.02.018

14. Zhang G, Wu L, Li B et al (2013) Retrospective analysis of prog-
nostic variables and clinical outcomes in surgically staged interme-
diate risk endometrial carcinoma. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 169:309–316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.02.025
15. Fukuda K, Mori M, Uchiyama M et al (1998) Prognostic signifi-
cance of progesterone receptor immunohistochemistry in endome-
trial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 69:220–225. https://doi.org/10.
1006/gyno.1998.5023

16. Singh P, Smith CL, Cheetham G et al (2008) Serous carcinoma of
the uterus-determination of HER-2/neu status using immunohisto-
chemistry, chromogenic in situ hybridization, and quantitative po-
lymerase chain reaction techniques: its significance and clinical
correlation. Int J Gynecol Cancer 18:1344–1351. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1525-1438.2007.01181.x

17. Giangrande PH, McDonnell DP (1999) The a and B isoforms of the
human progesterone receptor: two functionally different transcrip-
tion factors encoded by a single gene. Recent Prog Horm Res 54:
291–313 discussion 313-314

18. Wik E, Ræder MB, Krakstad C et al (2013) Lack of estrogen
receptor-α is associated with epithelial-Mesenchymal transition
and PI3K alterations in endometrial carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res.
https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3039
Jongen V, Briët J, de Jong R et al (2009) Expression of estrogen
receptor-alpha and -beta and progesterone receptor-a and -B in a large

19.

Unsupervised Clustering of Immunohistochemical Markers to Define High-Risk Endometrial Cancer

469

cohort of patients with endometrioid endometrial cancer. Gynecol
Oncol 112:537–542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.10.032
20. Lapi Nska-Szumczyk S, Supernat A, Majewska H et al (2014)
HER2-positive endometrial cancer subtype carries poor prognosis.
Clin Transl Sci. https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.12207

21. Hanekamp EE, Gielen SC, Smid-Koopman E et al (2003)
Consequences of loss of progesterone receptor expression in develop-
ment of invasive endometrial cancer. Clin Cancer Res 9:4190–4199
22. Saegusa M, Okayasu I (2000) Changes in expression of estrogen
receptors alpha and beta in relation to progesterone receptor and
pS2 status in normal and malignant endometrium. Jpn J Cancer
Res 91:510–518

23. Sho T, Hachisuga T, Nguyen TT et al (2014) Expression of estrogen
receptor-α as a prognostic factor in patients with uterine serous
carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 24:102–106. https://doi.org/10.
1097/IGC.0000000000000029

24. Soslow RA, Shen PU, Chung MH et al (2000) Cyclin D1 expres-
sion in high-grade endometrial carcinomas–association with histo-
logic subtype. Int J Gynecol Pathol 19:329–334
2 5 . Va n g R , W h i t a k e r B P, F a r h o o d A I e t a l

( 2 0 0 1 )
Immunohistochemical analysis of clear cell carcinoma of the gy-
necologic tract. Int J Gynecol Pathol 20:252–259

26. Ansink AC, Cross PA, Scorer P et al (1997) The hormonal receptor
status of uterine carcinosarcomas (mixed müllerian tumours): an
immunohistochemical study. J Clin Pathol 50:328–331

27. Demopoulos RI, Mesia AF, Mittal K, Vamvakas E (1999)
Immunohistochemical comparison of uterine papillary serous and
papillary endometrioid carcinoma: clues to pathogenesis. Int J
Gynecol Pathol 18:233–237

28. Reid-Nicholson M, Iyengar P, Hummer AJ et al (2006)
Immunophenotypic diversity of endometrial adenocarcinomas: im-
plications for differential diagnosis. Mod Pathol 19:1091–1100.
https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800620

29. Tashiro H, Isacson C, Levine R et al (1997) p53 gene mutations are
common in uterine serous carcinoma and occur early in their path-
ogenesis. Am J Pathol 150:177–185

30. Matias-Guiu X, Davidson B (2014) Prognostic biomarkers in en-
dometrial and ovarian carcinoma. Virchows Arch 464:315–331.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-013-1509-y

31. Alkushi A, Lim P, Coldman A et al (2004) Interpretation of p53
immunoreactivity in endometrial carcinoma: establishing a clinical-
ly relevant cut-off level. Int J Gynecol Pathol 23:129–137
32. Dupont J, Wang X, Marshall DS et al (2004) Wilms tumor gene
(WT1) and p53 expression in endometrial carcinomas: a study of
130 cases using a tissue microarray. Gynecol Oncol 94:449–455.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2004.05.014

33. Mitselou A, Ioachim E, Kitsou E et al (2003) Immunohistochemical
study of apoptosis-related Bcl-2 protein and its correlation with
proliferation indices (Ki67, PCNA), tumor suppressor genes (p53,
pRb), the oncogene c-erbB-2, sex steroid hormone receptors and
other clinicopathological features, in normal, hyperplastic and neo-
plastic endometrium. In Vivo 17:469–477

34. Zhang M, Zhang P, Zhang C et al (2009) Prognostic significance of
Bcl-2 and Bax protein expression in the patients with oral squamous
cell carcinoma. J Oral Pathol Med 38:307–313. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1600-0714.2008.00689.x

35. Miturski R, Semczuk A, Tomaszewski J, Jakowicki J (1998) Bcl-2
protein expression in endometrial carcinoma: the lack of correlation
with p53. Cancer Lett 133:63–69

36. Zhang R, He Y, Zhang X et al (2012) Estrogen receptor-regulated
microRNAs contribute to the BCL2/BAX imbalance in endometrial

adenocarcinoma and precancerous lesions. Cancer Lett 314:155–
165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2011.09.027

37. Zheng W, Cao P, Zheng M et al (1996) p53 overexpression and bcl-
2 persistence in endometrial carcinoma: comparison of papillary
serous and endometrioid subtypes. Gynecol Oncol 61:167–174.
https://doi.org/10.1006/gyno.1996.0120

38. Moriyama T, Littell RD, Debernardo R et al (2004) BAG-1 expres-
sion in normal and neoplastic endometrium. Gynecol Oncol 94:
289–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2004.04.026

39. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Kandoth C, Schultz N
et al (2013) Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial car-
cinoma. Nature 497:67–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12113

40. Hussein YR, Weigelt B, Levine DA et al (2014) Clinicopathological
analysis of endometrial carcinomas harboring somatic POLE exonu-
clease domain mutations. Mod Pathol. https://doi.org/10.1038/
modpathol.2014.143

41. Uzan C, Cortez A, Dufournet C et al (2004) Eutopic endometrium
and peritoneal, ovarian and bowel endometriotic tissues express a
different profile of matrix metalloproteinases-2, −3 and −11, and of
tissue inhibitor metalloproteinases-1 and -2. Virchows Arch 445:
603–609. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-004-1117-y

42. Graesslin O, Cortez A, Uzan C et al (2006) Endometrial tumor
invasiveness is related to metalloproteinase 2 and tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase 2 expressions. Int J Gynecol Cancer 16:1911–
1917. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1525-1438.2006.00717.x

43. Ferguson SE, Olshen AB, Viale A et al (2004) Gene expression
profiling of tamoxifen-associated uterine cancers: evidence for
two molecular classes of endometrial carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol
92:719–725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2003.10.038

44. Moser PL, Kieback DG, Hefler L et al (1999) Immunohistochemical
detection of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) 1 and 2, and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 (TIMP 2) in stage IB cervical cancer.
Anticancer Res 19:4391–4393

45. Wang F-Q, So J, Reierstad S, Fishman DA (2005) Matrilysin (MMP-7)
promotes invasion of ovarian cancer cells by activation of progelatinase.
Int J Cancer 114:19–31. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.20697

46. Katsura M, Furumoto H, Nishimura M et al (1998) Overexpression
of CD44 variants 6 and 7 in human endometrial cancer. Gynecol
Oncol 71:185–189. https://doi.org/10.1006/gyno.1998.5169
47. Tempfer C, Haeusler G, Kaider A et al (1998) The prognostic value of
CD44 isoform expression in endometrial cancer. Br J Cancer 77:1137
48. Ayhan A, Tok EC, Bildirici I, Ayhan A (2001) Overexpression of CD44
variant 6 in human endometrial cancer and its prognostic significance.
Gynecol Oncol 80:355–358. https://doi.org/10.1006/gyno.2000.6014

49. Hoshimoto K, Yamauchi N, Takazawa Y et al (2003) CD44 variant
6 in endometrioid carcinoma of the uterus: its expression in the
adenocarcinoma component is an independent prognostic marker.
Pathol Res Pract 199:71–77

50. Gun BD, Bahadir B, Bektas S et al (2012) Clinicopathological
significance of fascin and CD44v6 expression in endometrioid car-
cinoma. Diagn Pathol 7:15

51. Yeung KY, Ruzzo WL (2001) Principal component analysis for
clustering gene expression data. Bioinformatics 17:763–774
52. Wang Y, Ma X, Xi C et al (2013) Correlation between estrogen
receptor status and clinicopathologic parameters in endometrial
cancer: a comparative study by immunohistochemistry using differ-
ent scoring systems. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi 42:509–514

53. Qureshi A, Pervez S (2010) Allred scoring for ER reporting and it’s
impact in clearly distinguishing ER negative from ER positive
breast cancers. J Pak Med Assoc 60:350–353

