Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668
& 2006 USCAP, Inc All rights reserved 0893-3952/06 $30.00
www.modernpathology.org

Cluster analysis of immunohistochemical
profiles in synovial sarcoma, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and
Ewing sarcoma

Stephen H Olsen, Dafydd G Thomas and David R Lucas

Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

As a result of overlapping morphologic and immunohistochemical features, it can be difficult to distinguish
synovial sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal
tumor in core biopsies. To analyze and compare immunohistochemical profiles, we stained tissue microarrays
of 23 synovial sarcomas, 23 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and 27 Ewing sarcomas with 22
antibodies potentially useful in the differential diagnosis, and analyzed the data with cluster analysis. Stain
intensity was scored as none, weak, or strong. For CD99, tumors with membranous accentuation were
independently categorized. Cluster analysis sorted five groups, with like tumors clustering together. Synovial
sarcoma clustered into two groups: one cytokeratin and EMA positive (n ╝ 11), the other mostly cytokeratin
negative, EMA positive, bcl-2 positive and mostly CD56 positive (n ╝ 9). Malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor clustered into two groups: one S100 positive, with nestin and NGFR positivity in most (n ╝ 10), the other
mostly S100 negative, and variably but mostly weakly positive for nestin and NGFR (n ╝ 11). Ewing sarcomas
clustered into a single group driven by membranous CD99 staining. Thirteen cases failed to cluster (outliers),
while three Ewing sarcomas clustered into groups of other tumor types. Paired antibodies for each tumor type
determined by visual assessment of cluster analysis data and statistical calculations of specificity, sensitivity,
and predictive values showed that EMA/CK7 for synovial sarcoma, nestin/S100 for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor, and membranous CD99/Fli-1 for Ewing sarcoma yielded high specificity and positive predictive
values. Cluster analysis also highlighted aberrant staining reactions and diagnostic pitfalls in these tumors.
Hierarchical cluster analysis is an effective method for analyzing high-volume immunohistochemical data.
Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668. doi:10.1038/modpathol.3800569; published online 10 March 2006

Keywords: immunohistochemistry; cluster analysis; tissue microarray; sarcoma

Advancements in image-guided needle core biopsy
technique have resulted in less invasive procedures
compared to traditional open biopsy. CT or ultra-
sound-guided core biopsy is now the standard
diagnostic test for soft tissue tumors in many cancer
including the University of Michigan.
centers,
Although core biopsy is associated with reduced
morbidity and greater convenience,
the small
sample size has made histological diagnosis more
challenging. This is especially true for tumors with

overlapping morphologic features, such as synovial
sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
and Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal
tumor; specifically, closely spaced, hyperchromatic
cells with frequent ovoid to round nuclear contours.
Advancements in immunohistochemistry in soft
tissue sarcomas have ameliorated this problem to
some extent. However,
limitations in sensitivity
and specificity for many of the common markers
continue to be problematic.

Correspondence: Dr DR Lucas, MD, Department of Pathology, The
University of Michigan Medical School, 1500 E. Medical Center
Drive, Room 2G332 UH, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0054, USA.
E-mail: drlucas@umich.edu
The results of this study were presented in part at the 94th
Annual Meeting of the United States and Canadian Academy
of Pathologists in San Antonio, TX, February 2005.
Received 27 September 2005; revised and accepted 17 January
2006; published online 10 March 2006

and CD99 are

Cytokeratin, S100,

typically
regarded as the most useful single markers for
synovial
sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor, and Ewing sarcoma, respectively.
However, they are not always reliable. For example,
cytokeratin, although positive in most biphasic
synovial sarcomas, is less likely to stain monophasic
and poorly differentiated synovial sarcomas in small
samples.1û3 In addition, cytokeratin can be found in

660

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

a minority of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors4 and Ewing sarcomas.5,6 S100 protein is
positive in only around half of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors,7 however, can also stain
synovial sarcoma4,8 and Ewing sarcoma,9 and thus
lacks sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be a
very reliable marker. Finally, CD99, although posi-
tive in 490%10û12 of Ewing sarcomas, lacks speci-
ficity since it stains other mesenchymal13 and
lymphoid neoplasms,11 including frequent expres-
sion in synovial sarcoma.1,9 As a result of the broad
spectrum of CD99-positive tumors,
it has been
proposed that membranous accentuation be re-
garded a more specific staining reaction for Ewing
sarcoma.10

calponin,16 beta-catenin,17

A number of other antibodies have been touted as
useful for these tumor types. For example, cytoker-
atin subsets, especially CK7 and 19,3,9,14 bcl-2,15
CD56,9
and matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)18 have been reported
as potentially useful
in synovial sarcoma; p75
nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR),19 nestin,20
CD57,7,21,22 CD34,22 PGP9.5,23 and GFAP21 in malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; Fli-1 in Ewing
sarcoma;6 and neuroectodermal markers such as
chromoganin, synaptophysin, and PGP9.5 in primi-
tive neuroectodermal tumor.24û27

In order to further characterize the immunohisto-
chemical profiles of synovial sarcoma, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and Ewing sarcoma
in a model that mimics small biopsy sampling, we
evaluated a series of 73 tumors in tissue microarrays
with a panel of 22 antibodies potentially useful in
the differential diagnosis. We then analyzed the data
with hierarchical cluster analysis, a mathematical
technique employed for analyzing large data sets,
most often used for gene arrays.

Table 1 Antibody information

Materials and methods

Tumors were identified via SNOMED search of the
pathology database, and 23 synovial sarcomas, 23
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and 27
Ewing sarcomas were selected, otherwise randomly,
based on available tumor volume. All tumors were
diagnosed by conventional methodology. Synovial
sarcoma diagnoses were confirmed by RT-PCR for
SYT/SSX in every case,28 and the tumors were
subcategorized as biphasic or monophasic based
upon review of the original sections. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors were subclassified
as spindle cell, epithelioid, pleomorphic or small
cell types based upon predominant histologic ele-
ment. From the clinical record, each malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor was categorized
as either sporadic or neurofibromatosis associated.
Tissue microarray slides from the Ewing sarcoma
cases were analyzed by fluorescence in-situ hybri-
dization (FISH) using a dual-color break-apart probe
cocktail
flanking the EWS-R1 breakpoint region
(22q12) (Vysis, Downers Grove, IL, USA).29 Tissue
microarray blocks were constructed from 1 mm
cores of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
in triplicate. One tissue microarray block was
produced for each tumor type, with each block
containing a variety of normal and neoplastic tissue
samples as internal controls.

The slides were stained with a panel of 22
antibodies by standard immunohistochemical tech-
niques. Antibody information with pretreatments
and incubation times are listed in Table 1. Intensity
of staining was scored as negative, weak, or strong
with attention to distribution and cellular localiza-
tion of staining. For CD99, the staining reaction was
categorized as generalized for any cytosolic or

Antibody

Source

City, State

Pretreatment

Dilution

Incubation (min)

PGP9.5
Fli-1
Nestin
GFAP
S100
NGFR
CD57
CD99
Chromo
Synapto
EMA
AE1/AE3
CK7
CK19
CD56
bcl-2
Calponin
Vimentin
Beta-catenin
ALK-1
MMP-2

DAKO
Neomarkers
SCBT
Novocastra
DAKO
Lab Vision Corp
BD Biosciences
DAKO
In-house (LK2H10)
Biogenex
DAKO
Chemicon Intl
DAKO
Novocastra
Accurate
Calbiochem
Novocastra
DAKO
BD Biosciences
DAKO
Novocastra

Carpinteria, CA
Fremont, CA
Santa Cruz, CA
Newcastle, UK
Carpinteria, CA
Chicago, IL
San Diego, CA
Carpinteria, CA
Ann Arbor, MI
San Ramon, CA
Carpinteria, CA
Temecula, CA
Carpinteria, CA
Burlingame, CA
Westbury, NY
San Diego, CA
Burlingame, CA
Carpinteria, CA
San Diego, CA
Carpinteria, CA
Burlingame, CA

HIER
HIER
HIER
HIER
None
Protease 1
HIER pH 9
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 6
Proteinase K
Proteinase K
Trypsin 5 min
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 9
Proteinase K
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 6
HIER pH 6
HIER 1 mM EDTA

1:200
1:500
1:500
1:100
1:500
1:50
1:10
1:5
1:80
1:600
1:25
1:100
1:12.5
1:150
1:10
1:40
1:200
1:400
1:500
1:50
1:80

30
60
60
60
30
32
32
32
32
32
30
30
30
60
32
32
30
30
60
60
60

Chromo, chromogranin; synapto, synaptophysin; SCBT, Santa Cruz Biotechnology; HEIR, heat-induced epitope retrieval (microwave).

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

661

membranous staining, or as membranous when
membranous accentuation was present. For beta-
catenin, positive staining was regarded as any
degree of cytoplasmic and/or nuclear staining,
however, tumors with nuclear staining were evalu-
ated separately.

Staining patterns were tabulated, and percentages
of positive tumors were calculated. Sensitivity,
specificity, and positive and negative predictive
values were calculated based on any degree of
positive staining (weak or strong) in the tumor
populations of interest in relation to the study set
as a whole. Euclidian (unsupervised) hierarchical
cluster analysis of intensity scores was performed
using GoldLinker Gold v4.6.1 (Improved Outcome
Inveray, ON, Canada) software. Major
Software,
division points of the data set were placed at the
third generation from the most
inclusive
cluster. Based upon visual assessment of the cluster
analysis data and calculated specificity, sensitivity,
positive, and negative predictive values, combina-
tions of antibodies deemed most useful
in the
differential diagnosis for each tumor type were
identified.

(all)

Results

Staining Patterns

Percentages of
staining intensity are presented in Table 2.

tumors showing weak or strong

Synovial sarcoma
EMA was the most sensitive marker for synovial
sarcoma (91%), with 74% of
tumors displaying
strong staining. It was also quite specific (82%). The
cytokeratins as a combined group were 70% sensi-
tive and 68% specific. AE1/AE3 was the most
sensitive cytokeratin (70%), however, displayed
staining overlap with the other tumor types, with
strong focal staining in 22% of Ewing sarcomas and
9% of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Cytokeratins 7 and 19, although not as sensitive as
AE1/AE3, were more specific (100 and 96%,
respectively). Positive staining for both CK7 and
EMA in a given tumor was 100% specific (52%
sensitive)
for synovial sarcoma. Strong staining
for bcl-2 or CD56 was present in 48 and 26% of syno-
vial sarcomas, respectively. Sensitivity/specificity
values were 87/70% for bcl-2 and 70/88% for
CD56. Based on the cluster map (Figure 1), positivity
for these markers tended to be more prevalent in
sarcomas. Strong
cytokeratin-negative
synovial
CD99 staining was present
in 70% of synovial
sarcomas, including 26% with strong membranous
staining (Figures 2û4).

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
S100 had low specificity (54%) and only moderate
sensitivity (57%) for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. For example, although strong S100

n
i
n
e
t
a
c

3
E
A

)
e
n
a
r
b
m
e
m

(

2
-
P
M
M

1
-
K
L
A

-
a
t
e
B

n
i
t
n
e
m
V

i

n
i
n
o
p
l
a
C

2
-
l
c
b

6
5
D
C

9
1
K
C

7
K
C

/
1
E
A

A
M
E

n
i
s
y
h
p
o
t
p
a
n
y
S

n
i
n
a
r
g
o
m
o
h
C

9
9
D
C

9
9
D
C

7
5
D
C

R
F
G
N

0
0
1
S

P
A
F
G

n
i
t
s
e
N

1
-
i
l
F

5
.
9
P
G
P

4
3
D
C

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

r
o
m
u
T

9

2
2

4

6
2

0

1
1

0

0

0

0

0

0

8
4

3
4

9

2
5

4
4

6
2

4

6
9

9

1
9

4
7

5
1

0

0

0

0

0

0

8
4

9
3

4

3
1

6
2

5
1

6
2

3
4

0

6
2

0

0

8
4

7
5

5
6

9

0

0

4

4

0

0

0

0

0

4

9

9

2
2

9
1

4
7

7
1

0

3
1

7

5
1

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

6
2

0

8
7

0
7

2
2

3
4

3
4

0

3
9

0

0

0

0

0

0

7
1

6
2

6
2

3
4

1
1

5
1

5
3

3
1

9

8
4

0

4
4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

8
4

0
3

7

0

9

2
2

2
2

7
1

8
4

5
1

0
7

6
2

2
5

6
2

7

7
6

0

0

4

7
1

0

0

k
a
e

W

g
n
o
r
t
S
a
m
o
c
r
a
s

l
a
i
v
o
n
y
S

g
n
o
r
t
S

t
n
a
n
g
i
l
a
M

k
a
e

W

e
v
r
e
n

l
a
r
e
h
p
i
r
e
p

r
o
m
u
t

h
t
a
e
h
s

k
a
e

W

g
n
o
r
t
S

a
m
o
c
r
a
s

g
n
i
w
E

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

n
o
i
t
c
a
e
r

y
b

s
r
o
m
u
t

e
v
i
t
i
s
o
p

f
o

s
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

2

e
l
b
a
T

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

662

staining was present in 48% of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors, it was also common, although
usually focal, in synovial sarcoma (35%), and Ewing
sarcoma (44%). NGFR stained more malignant

peripheral nerve sheath tumors than did S100, but
lacked sufficient sensitivity and specificity to
distinguish it from the other tumors. Furthermore,
NGFR was often weakly positive, with only 26% of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors showing
strong staining. Nestin was the most sensitive (78%)

Figure 2 Cytokeratin 7 staining in a biphasic synovial sarcoma.
Cytokeratin 7 was highly specific for synovial sarcoma, not
present in the other tumors types. The combination of CK7 and
EMA had a high degree of specificity and sensitivity for synovial
sarcoma, 100 and 52%, respectively.

Figure 3 Nestin was the most specific and sensitive marker for
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, rarely staining the other
tumor types. Combined with S100 the specificity and sensitivity
values were 100 and 48%, respectively.

Figure 1 Cluster map of immunohistochemical data. Antibodies
are arrayed at the top and tumor types along the right side. Major
division points of the data set were placed at the third generation
from the most (all) inclusive cluster (vertical red line on left side),
which divided the tumors into five clusters, groups AûE.
Red ╝ strongly positive, black ╝ weakly positive, blue ╝ negative,
SnSrc ╝ synovial
B ╝ biphasic, M ╝ monophasic,
MPNST ╝ malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, ES ╝ Ewing
sarcoma.

sarcoma,

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

663

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

sensitivity,
including 48% with strong nuclear
staining). However, it had more limited specificity
(65%), such that 22% each of synovial sarcomas and
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors were
strongly positive. Positivity for both membranous
CD99 and Fli-1 in a given tumor increased the
specificity to 96%, with 56% sensitivity.

Nonspecific and nonsensitive antibodies
Vimentin and PGP9.5 showed low specificities, each
staining many tumors of each type. Similarly, MMP-
2 and beta-catenin stained various tumors, but did
not display distinct patterns. Strong nuclear staining
for beta-catenin was present in 13% of synovial
sarcomas, 4% of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors, and 0% of Ewing sarcomas. Chromogranin,
CD57, ALK-1, GFAP, CD34, and calponin displayed
no staining in any tumor, while synaptophysin was
positive in only one Ewing sarcoma in this study.

Cluster Analysis

Cluster analysis highlighted five main groups
related staining patterns, and in
(Figure 1) of
general, like tumor types clustered together. How-
ever, overlap of staining patterns caused three
Ewing sarcomas to be included within synovial
sarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor groups, and 13 other tumors of various types
to be outliers, not falling into any defined group.

Synovial sarcoma
Synovial sarcomas generally fell into two groups, A
and B. Group A (n ╝ 11) was based on uniform
positivity for EMA and one or more of
the
cytokeratin subtypes, and consisted entirely of
synovial sarcomas. Eight (72%) were biphasic and
three (27%) were monophasic. Ten (91%) group A
tumors had an SSX1 translocation, while only one
(9%) had SSX2. Five (45%) of these group A tumors
demonstrated strong membranous CD99 staining.
Strong bcl-2 staining was present in three (27%)
tumors, while strong CD56 staining was seen in only
one. Group B synovial sarcomas (n ╝ 9) were also
uniformly positive for EMA, but rarely positive for
cytokeratin, with only two cases (22%) showing
strong staining for AE1/AE3. Among the nine
tumors in this group, two (22%) were biphasic and
seven (78%) were monophasic. Six (67%) were
SSX1 and three (33%) were SSX2. Compared to
the tumors in group B demonstrated
Group A,
higher rates of strong staining for bcl-2 (78%) and
CD56 (44%). Although all of these tumors were
CD99 positive, none had membranous accentuation.
Group B also included a CD99-positive Ewing
sarcoma that lacked membranous accentuation (ES
13 in Figure 1). This tumor, confirmed by FISH, was
strongly positive for bcl-2, but lacked any EMA or
CK staining. Three synovial sarcomas were outliers
that failed to cluster with any group, two of which

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

Figure 4 (a) Strong membranous staining for CD99 was present in
78% of Ewing sarcomas, and was the driving factor in the cluster
analysis for this tumor. (b) Membranous CD99 staining, however,
showed limited specificity for Ewing sarcoma, exemplified by
strong staining in 26% of synovial sarcomas.

and specific (96%) stain for malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor. In addition, its staining inten-
sity tended to be strong, present in 48% of the
tumors. Positivity for both nestin and S100 in a
given tumor was highly specific (100% specific,
48% sensitive)
for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor
General (cytosolic or membranous) CD99 staining
lacked specificity, and was common in all three
tumors. For example, strong staining was present in
93% of Ewing sarcomas, 70% of synovial sarcomas,
and 43% of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors. Membrane staining was more specific
(85% specificity, 78% sensitivity) for Ewing sarco-
ma. However, 26% of synovial sarcomas also had
strong membranous staining, yet all malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors were negative.
Fli-1 stained a majority of Ewing sarcomas (63%

664

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

(SnSrc 25 and 28 in Figure 1) were fairly closely
related to groups A and B. Both were monophasic,
SSX2 synovial sarcomas that were positive for
cytokeratin and CD99, but negative for membranous
CD99; one was negative for EMA. The third synovial
sarcoma outlier (SnSrc 16) was more distant in the
cluster histogram and actually was more closely
related to Ewing sarcoma (group E). This mono-
phasic, SSX1 tumor was strongly positive for
membranous CD99, negative for EMA and cyto-
keratin, and showed only weak staining for bcl-2
and CD56.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
Most of
the malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors similarly fell into two groups, C and D.
Group C (n ╝ 13) contained tumors that were
predominantly negative for S100 with inconsistent
and mostly weak staining for nestin and NGFR. This
group included two Ewing sarcomas (ES 32 and 33
in Figure 1), both with cytosolic, but not membra-
nous, CD99 staining; one confirmed by FISH, the
other non-informative. Group D (n ╝ 10) consisted
entirely of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors that were uniformly S100 positive. Strong
staining for nestin and NGFR were present in eight
(80%) and five (50%) tumors, respectively. As the
majority (96%) of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors in our study set were spindle cell type (with
only one epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor), no correlation could be made
between histology and immunohistochemical pro-
file. Two malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
outliers failed to cluster into a defined group. One of
these (MPNST 16) was close in relation to group C
and was similarly S100 negative, only weakly
positive for nestin, and negative for NGFR. The
second tumor (MPNST 15) was S100 positive, but
negative for both nestin and NGFR. Seven (64%)
group C tumors, three (30%) group D tumors, and
one outlier occurred in neurofibromatosis patients.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor
Most Ewing sarcomas fell into a single cluster, group
E (n ╝ 17) based upon strong membranous CD99
staining in all the tumors (100%) and strong staining
for Fli-1 in 11 (65%). This group consisted entirely
of Ewing sarcomas. Thirteen of these tumors were
confirmed by FISH, one was negative, and three
were considered noninformative. As noted above,
one Ewing sarcoma (ES 13), which was CD99
positive without membranous accentuation and
Fli-1 negative, clustered with synovial sarcomas
into group B. Two Ewing sarcomas (ES 32 and 33),
which were also CD99 positive without membra-
nous accentuation, clustered with malignant per-
ipheral nerve sheath tumors into group C (ES 32
confirmed by FISH, ES 33 noninformative). Seven
(26% of the Ewing sarcomas) were outliers that
failed to cluster with any group. Two of these (ES 3
and 20) were CD99- and Fli-1 negative. One (ES 27)

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

was CD99 positive but Fli-1 negative. Four (ES 12,
14, 16, and 19) were membranous CD99 positive and
Fli-1 negative. All seven Ewing sarcoma outliers
were confirmed by FISH.

Discussion

Cluster analysis is a statistical methodology, which
organizes complex multivariate data sets into groups
or clusters with similar patterns. Multiple types of
cluster analysis exist and have been used in a wide
variety of fields, but a particularly relevant example
is the hierarchical cluster analysis employed in
analysis of gene or DNA microarray data.30 In short,
hierarchichical analysis works by grouping similar
objects into small clusters and then successively
merging clusters until one large cluster comprising
the whole data set is achieved. The clustering is
then displayed in the form of a branching tree
diagram, which can be broken into distinct clusters
by cutting across the tree at a particular height. In
this study, we used GoldLinker Gold v4.6.1 (Im-
proved Outcome Software, Inveray, ON, Canada)
software to perform an unsupervised (raw data
without preset classifications) hierarchical cluster
analysis of our manually scored immunohisto-
chemical data. We analyzed a large data set of 22
antibodies in 73 tumors consisting of three sarcoma
phenotypes that have overlapping morphologies.
Using a model (tissue microarray cores) that mimics
small biopsy sampling, cluster analysis was very
effective at grouping the tumors into diagnostic
categories, for graphically identifying specific anti-
bodies that drive the differential clustering that can
be confirmed by statistical calculations, and for
designing useful antibody panels. In addition, it
highlighted a number of important caveats inherent
to the immunohistochemical differential diagnosis
of these tumors.

it

In addition,

Synovial sarcoma is relatively easy to diagnose
when it shows classic biphasic morphology and/or
when it is cytokeratin- or EMA positive. Diagnostic
difficulties arise, however, with monophasic and
poorly differentiated tumors, as well as in small
samplings of biphasic tumors comprising only the
spindle cell component.
is not
uncommon for synovial sarcoma to be cytokeratin-
or EMA negative in core biopsies. Since the
morphologic features in synovial sarcoma are quite
variable, it can mimic other tumors, especially small
round cell tumors9 such as Ewing sarcoma, rhabdo-
myosarcoma, and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma; or
pure spindle cell tumors such as malignant peri-
pheral nerve sheath tumor and fibrosarcoma.
Immunohistochemically, synovial sarcoma can also
mimic Ewing sarcoma and malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor since it can be positive for
CD99 or S100,1,8,9 respectively.

In this study, EMA was the single most sensitive
and specific marker for synovial sarcoma, staining

665

all but two cases. We also found cytokeratin stains in
general to be specific, although not quite as sensitive
as EMA. As previously reported, certain cytokeratin
subsets,3,9,14 notably CK7 and CK19, show greater
specificity than pan-keratins such as AE1/AE3. We
found CK7 to be the most specific marker for
synovial sarcoma, demonstrating strong staining in
over half the cases, yet with no staining in any of the
other tumor types. CK19 was only slightly less
specific.
In contrast, AE1/AE3 stained multiple
Ewing sarcomas and malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors, a finding observed by others,4,6,14 and
is therefore less helpful diagnostically. The combi-
nation of positive staining for both EMA and CK7
staining in a given tumor is highly specific (100% in
this study) with a high positive predictive value for
distinguishing synovial sarcoma from malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor and Ewing sarcoma.
Although a majority of the synovial sarcomas
stained with bcl-2 and to a lesser extent CD56,
strong staining was present in only 48 and 26%,
respectively. However, these markers showed rather
high specificities, and therefore, bcl-2 and CD56
appear to be well suited as adjuncts or second tier
stains to EMA and cytokeratin. In this study, bcl-2
and CD56 were especially useful in cytokeratin-
negative tumors. Many of the synovial sarcomas in
this study were CD99 positive, with a substantial
number (26%) showing strong membranous stain-
ing, often regarded as a more or less specific pattern
for Ewing sarcoma.10 Although, CD99 staining in
synovial sarcoma is well known1,9 and even serves
as an adjunctive diagnostic marker, this highlights
is
an important potential pitfall with CD99.
important to be aware of CD99 staining in synovial
sarcoma since it can resemble a small round cell
tumor and be misdiagnosed as Ewing sarcoma
with a limited antibody panel. On the other hand,
membranous CD99 staining in synovial sarcoma
may actually be helpful in differentiatiating mono-
phasic or poorly differentiated synovial sarcoma
from morphologically similar malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor, since no malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor stained with a membranous
pattern in our study set. Other purportedly useful
markers of synovial sarcoma, beta-catenin, MMP-2,
and calponin,16û18 were seemingly useless in our
data set. For example, beta-catenin marked signifi-
cant numbers of both malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors and Ewing sarcomas and thus had
low specificity. When analysis was restricted to
nuclear beta-catenin staining, strong reactivity was
present in only three synovial sarcomas and one
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, which
had no effect on the cluster analysis. MMP-2 stained
only scattered tumors throughout the data set, and
calponin stained no tumors.

It

Cluster analysis divided synovial sarcomas into
two groups with different morphologic and mole-
cular tendancies. The first group, driven by positiv-
ity for both EMA and cytokeratin, was dominated by

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

biphasic (73%) and SSX1 translocated tumors
(91%). The second group, which consisted of
EMA-positive and mostly cytokeratin-negative tu-
mors, was dominated by monophasic synovial
sarcomas
(78%), and more SSX2 translocated
tumors (33%).

In contrast to synovial sarcoma, malignant per-
ipheral nerve sheath tumor is notoriously difficult to
diagnose,
forming several different morphologic
patterns, including spindle cell tumors that resem-
ble synovial sarcoma, a small cell variant mimicking
Ewing sarcoma,31 as well as epithelioid and pleo-
morphic patterns. S100 is traditionally regarded as
the best marker for malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor, however, it is positive in only around
half the tumors.7,22 We found 48% of malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors to be strongly
positive in our study. Furthermore, S100 also stains
synovial sarcoma8 and Ewing sarcoma,32 exempli-
fied by 35 and 44%, respectively, with strong
staining in our study set. Other reportedly helpful
markers, CD3422 and GFAP,21 displayed little utility
in our study set. CD34 stained only scattered
tumors, while GFAP stained none. CD57, another
purportedly useful marker, failed to stain any of our
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, which
was curious, considering the relatively high percen-
tages of staining that have been reported.7,21,22 The
reason for this difference is not clear, since we had
excellent internal and external controls (tonsillar
germinal center natural killer cells), and we re-
peated the staining at a lower titer with the same
results.

We evaluated a number of other markers of neural
differentiation (NGFR, nestin, and PGP9.5), as
potentially useful in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. Although NGFR stained the majority
of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in our
study set, it mostly displayed weak staining, with
strong staining in only 26%. In addition, NGFR had
low specificity, particularly due to staining in nearly
half the synovial sarcomas, a finding previously
reported.9,33,34 PGP9.5 was not useful since it stained
high numbers of all three tumors types in this study.
The lack of specificity for this marker has been
highlighted in the literature.35

Nestin proved to be the single best marker for
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in this
study, showing high specificity and sensitivity
values (96 and 78%, respectively). Strong staining
for nestin was present in 48% of tumors, compared
to strong staining in only one Ewing sarcoma and no
synovial sarcomas. Positive staining for both S100
and nestin in a given tumor was highly specific with
a positive predictive value of 100% for distinguish-
ing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor from
synovial sarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. As with
synovial sarcoma, cluster analysis divided malig-
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
into two
groups. One group was immunohistochemically
well differentiated consisting entirely of S100- and

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

666

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

nestin-positive tumors, while the other group was
largely negative for these markers. We were unable
to identify any morphological differences between
these two groups. However, since the vast majority
of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in our
study set were spindle cell tumors, we are unable to
comment about differential staining patterns in the
various morphologic subtypes of malignant peri-
pheral nerve sheath tumor. And, while we found a
stronger association between neurofibromatosis and
the less differentiated group C tumors, the signifi-
cance of this result is unclear. Importantly, there still
exists a relatively large group of poorly differen-
tiated S100-negative malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors, which continues to be difficult to
diagnose by immunohistochemistry. With the addi-
tion of nestin to the panel,
this group can be
reduced.

lymphoma

Ewing sarcoma historically had been defined by
absence of a specific line of differentiation, and
immunohistochemical studies were primarily car-
ried out to exclude other small round cell tumors,
especially
and rhabdomyosarcoma.
When CD99 was discovered it was initially believed
to be a specific Ewing marker.36 However, it was
found to stain other tumors, including lymphoblas-
tic lymphoma,37 mesenchymal chondrosarcoma,13
and synovial sarcoma1,9 among others, which are
within the morphologic differential diagnosis of
Ewing sarcoma. A membranous pattern of CD99
staining is believed to be more specific than
cytosolic staining,10 and although it does appear to
be more specific, this too can be found in other
tumors. For instance, 26% of synovial sarcomas in
our study had strong membranous CD99 staining. By
contrast, although 43% of malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors had strong CD99 staining, none
had a membranous pattern, suggesting that
the
pattern of CD99 staining may have some utility for
differentiating Ewing sarcoma from it.

Fli-1,

t(11:22),

the gene product of

initially
reported to be useful in Ewing sarcoma,38,39 was
similarly found to stain other tumors, including
lymphoblastic lymphoma.39 In our study, it had
moderate sensitivity (68%), similar
to reported
values,38,39 but limited specificity, displaying over-
lap staining with both synovial sarcoma and
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, 22% each
with strong nuclear staining. Thus, Fli-1 is probably
most useful in combination with a panel of markers,
serving as an adjunct to CD99. The neuroectodermal
marker PGP9.5 lacks specificity, staining multiple
synovial
and malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumors,35 and is therefore not useful.
Chromogranin and synaptophysin showed virtually
no staining in our Ewing sarcomas; most likely due
to a disproportionate number of undifferentiatied
(nonprimitive neuroectodermal)
in the
data set.

sarcomas

tumors

Based upon visual examination of the cluster
analysis data along with calculated sensitivity,

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

specificity, positive and negative predictive values,
we were able to identify pairs of antibodies for each
tumor type (EMA/CK7 for synovial sarcoma, S100/
nestin for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
and CD99/Fli-1 for Ewing sarcoma) that were highly
specific within this differential diagnostic context.
Based upon our results we would recommend this
panel of six markers. CD56 and bcl-2 can be added
when synovial sarcoma is suspected but EMA and
CK7 are negative.

By grouping tumors on the basis of

their
immunohistochemical profiles, hierarchical cluster
analysis displays the data points in a visually
manageable format
from which one can make
observations, draw conclusions, and design anti-
body panels. Additionally, the small tissue sam-
plings in the tissue microarrays as a model mimic
core biopsy specimens. In this study, we preselected
three sarcomas that have overlapping morphologic
features and stained
and immunohistochemical
them with a large panel of markers regarded as
useful in the differential diagnosis. Cluster analysis
grouped the tumors into five groups with very little
overlap of tumor types. It highlighted combinations
in the
of antibodies that appear most useful
differential diagnoses, which were confirmed by
statistical calculations. It also reaffirmed the short-
comings and pitfalls of
immunohistochemistry,
exemplified by a number of outliers (ie tumors
which did not cluster into any of
the defined
groups), as well as a few tumors that showed
aberrant clustering. Hierarchical cluster analysis is
a very effective method for analyzing and comparing
large sets of immunohistochemical data.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by the Robert Urich
Memorial Sarcoma Fund at
the University of
Michigan. Dr Thomas is a Walther Cancer Institute
Research Investigator
their
continued support. We thank Dr Christine E Fuller,
St Jude ChildrenÆs Research Hospital, Memphis,
TN, for performing fluorescence in situ hybridization
in the Ewing sarcoma cases.

and acknowledges

References

1 Dei Tos AP, Wadden C, Calonje E. Immunohistochem-
ical demonstration of glycoprotein p30/32MIC2 (CD99)
in synovial sarcoma: a potential cause of diagnostic
confusion. Appl Immunohistochem 1995;3:168û173.
2 Ordonez NG, Mahfouz SM, Mackay B. Synovial
sarcoma: an immunohistochemical and ultrastructural
study. Hum Pathol 1990;21:733û749.

3 Miettinen M, Limon J, Niezabitowski A, et al. Patterns
of keratin polypeptides in 110 biphasic, monophasic,
and poorly differentiated synovial sarcomas. Virchows
Arch 2000;437:275û283.

4 Smith TA, Machen SK, Fisher C, et al. Usefulness of
cytokeratin subsets for distinguishing monophasic
synovial sarcoma from malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;112:641û648.
5 Gu M, Antonescu CR, Guiter G, et al. Cytokeratin
immunoreactivity in EwingÆs sarcoma: prevalence in
50 cases confirmed by molecular diagnostic studies.
Am J Surg Pathol 2000;24:410û416.

6 Folpe AL, Goldblum JR, Rubin BP, et al. Morphologic
and immunophenotypic diversity in Ewing family
tumors: a study of 66 genetically confirmed cases.
Am J Surg Pathol 2005;29:1025û1033.

7 Meis JM, Enzinger FM, Martz KL, et al. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (malignant schwanno-
mas) in children. Am J Surg Pathol 1992;16:694û707.
8 Fisher C, Schofield JB. S-100 protein positive synovial

sarcoma. Histopathology 1991;19:375û377.

9 Folpe AL, Schmidt RA, Chapman D, et al. Poorly
differentiated synovial sarcoma: immunohistochem-
ical distinction from primitive neuroectodermal
tumors and high-grade malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors. Am J Surg Pathol 1998;22:673û682.
10 Sebire NJ, Gibson S, Rampling D, et al. Immunohisto-
chemical
findings in embryonal small round cell
tumors with molecular diagnostic confirmation. Appl
Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2005;13:1û5.

11 Lucas DR, Bentley G, Dan ME, et al. Ewing sarcoma vs
lymphoblastic lymphoma. A comparative immuno-
histochemical study. Am J Clin Pathol 2001;115:11û17.
12 Devaney K, Abbondanzo SL, Shekitka KM, et al. MIC2
detection in tumors of bone and adjacent soft tissues.
Clin Orthop 1995;310:176û187.

13 Granter SR, Renshaw AA, Fletcher CD, et al. CD99
reactivity in mesenchymal chondrosarcoma. Hum
Pathol 1996;27:1273û1276.

14 Machen SK, Fisher C, Gautam RS, et al. Utility of
cytokeratin subsets for distinguishing poorly differen-
tiated synovial sarcoma from peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal
tumour. Histopathology 1998;33:
501û507.

15 Hirakawa N, Naka T, Yamamoto I, et al. Overexpres-
sion of bcl-2 protein in synovial sarcoma: a compara-
tive study of other soft tissue spindle cell sarcomas
and an additional analysis by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Hum Pathol 1996;27:1060û1065.

16 Fisher C, Montgomery E, Healy V. Calponin and
the
h-caldesmon expression in synovial sarcoma;
use of calponin in diagnosis. Histopathology 2003;42:
588û593.

17 Hasegawa T, Yokoyama R, Matsuno Y, et al. Prognostic
significance of histologic grade and nuclear expression
of beta-catenin in synovial sarcoma. Hum Pathol
2001;32:257û263.

18 Saito T, Oda Y, Sakamoto A, et al. Matrix metallo-
proteinase-2 expression correlates with morpholo-
gical and immunohistochemical epithelial characte-
ristics in synovial sarcoma. Histopathology 2002;40:
279û285.

19 Hoshi N, Hiraki H, Yamaki T, et al. Frequent expres-
sion of 75 kDa nerve growth factor receptor and
phosphotyrosine in human peripheral nerve tumours:
an immunohistochemical study on paraffin-embedded
tissues. Virchows Arch 1994;424:563û568.

20 Shimada STT, Nagasaka T, Kuroda M, et al. Nestin
expression in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
(MPNST) and other soft tissue tumors. Mod Pathol
2005;1:22A.

667

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

21 Giangaspero F, Fratamico FC, Ceccarelli C, et al.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors and spindle
cell sarcomas: an immunohistochemical analysis of
multiple markers. Appl Pathol 1989;7:134û144.

22 Zhou H, Coffin CM, Perkins SL, et al. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor: a comparison of grade,
immunophenotype, and cell cycle/growth activation
marker expression in sporadic and neurofibromatosis
1-related lesions. Am J Surg Pathol 2003;27:1337û
1345.

23 Hoang MP, Sinkre P, Albores-Saavedra J. Expression of
protein gene product 9.5 in epithelioid and conven-
tional malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 2001;125:1321û1325.

24 Parham DM, Hijazi Y, Steinberg SM, et al. Neuroecto-
dermal differentiation in EwingÆs sarcoma family of
tumors does not predict tumor behavior. Hum Pathol
1999;30:911û918.

25 Dierick AM, Roels H, Langlois M. The immunopheno-
type of EwingÆs sarcoma. An immunohistochemical
analysis. Pathol Res Pract 1993;189:26û32.

26 Banerjee SS, Agbamu DA, Eyden BP, et al. Clinico-
pathological characteristics of peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumour of skin and subcutaneous
tissue. Histopathology 1997;31:355û366.

27 Carter RL, al-Sams SZ, Corbett RP, et al. A comparative
study of immunohistochemical staining for neuron-
specific enolase, protein gene product 9.5 and S-100
protein in neuroblastoma, EwingÆs sarcoma and other
round cell
in children. Histopathology
1990;16:461û467.

tumours

28 Thomas DG, Giordano TJ, Sanders D, et al. Expression
of receptor tyrosine kinases epidermal growth factor
receptor and HER-2/neu in synovial sarcoma. Cancer
2005;103:830û838.

29 Lai R, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Navid F, et al. STAT3
activation in ewing sarcoma family of tumors. Mod
Pathol 2005;18:17A.

30 Yeung KY, Fraley C, Murua A, et al. Model-based
clustering and data transformations for gene expres-
sion data. Bioinformatics 2001;17:977û987.

31 Abe S, Imamura T, Park P, et al. Small round-cell type
of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor. Mod
Pathol 1998;11:747û753.

32 Franchi A, Pasquinelli G, Cenacchi G, et al. Immuno-
histochemical and ultrastructural
investigation of
neural differentiation in Ewing sarcoma/PNET of
bone and soft
tissues. Ultrastruct Pathol 2001;25:
219û225.

33 Perosio PM, Brooks JJ. Expression of nerve growth
tissue

in paraffin-embedded soft

factor
tumors. Am J Pathol 1988;132:152û160.

receptor

34 Fanburg-Smith JC, Miettinen M. Low-affinity nerve
growth factor receptor (p75) in dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans and other nonneural tumors: a study of
1150 tumors and fetal and adult normal tissues. Hum
Pathol 2001;32:976û983.

35 Campbell LK, Thomas JR, Lamps LW, et al. Protein
gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5) is not a specific marker of
neural and nerve sheath tumors: an immunohisto-
chemical study of 95 mesenchymal neoplasms. Mod
Pathol 2003;16:963û969.

36 Ambros IM, Ambros PF, Strehl S, et al. MIC2 is a
specific marker for EwingÆs sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal
tumors. Evidence for a
common histogenesis of EwingÆs sarcoma and periph-
tumors from MIC2
eral primitive neuroectodermal

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668

Cluster analysis in immunohistochemistry
SH Olsen et al

668

expression and specific
Cancer 1991;67:1886û1893.

chromosome

aberration.

37 Riopel M, Dickman PS, Link MP, et al. MIC2 analysis
in pediatric lymphomas and leukemias. Hum Pathol
1994;25:396û399.

38 Llombart-Bosch A, Navarro S. Immunohistochemical
detection of EWS and FLI-1 proteinss in Ewing
tumors:
and primitive neuroectodermal
sarcoma

comparative analysis with CD99 (MIC-2) expression.
Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2001;9:255û260.
39 Folpe AL, Hill CE, Parham DM, et al. Immunohisto-
chemical detection of FLI-1 protein expression: a
study of 132 round cell tumors with emphasis on
CD99-positive mimics of EwingÆs sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. Am J Surg Pathol 2000;24:
1657û1662.

Modern Pathology (2006) 19, 659û668


